Meconium Aspiration Syndrome, or MAS,
occurs
when a newborn inhales meconium-stained
amniotic fluid before or during delivery.
That meconium doesn't just sit there, it
creates a cascade
of problems that can rapidly compromise
both oxygenation and ventilation.
Here's the core concept you need to lock
in.
MAS is a mixed pathophysiology disease.
You're dealing with airway obstruction,
inflammation,
surfactant inactivation, and pulmonary
hypertension all at the same time.
First, the obstruction.
Meconium can partially block airways,
creating a ball valve effect.
Air gets in, but can't fully get out.
This leads to air trapping and
hyperinflation.
But in other areas, complete obstruction
can cause atelectasis,
so now you have uneven ventilation across
the lungs.
Second, inflammation and surfactant
dysfunction.
Meconium is chemically irritating.
It damages the alveoli and inactivates
surfactant, making the lungs
stiff and harder to ventilate.
That increases the work of breathing and
worsens oxygenation.
Third, and critically, persistent
pulmonary hypertension
of the newborn, or PPHN.
Hypoxia causes pulmonary vasoconstriction,
which increases pulmonary pressures and leads
to right-to-left shunting.
That means blood is bypassing the lungs
entirely, making oxygen
therapy less effective.
Clinically, these babies present with
respiratory distress shortly after birth.
You'll see tachypnea, grunting, nasal
flaring,
retractions, and often coarse breath
sounds.
Oxygen levels may be difficult to
maintain, even with increasing
support.
From a diagnostic standpoint, chest x-ray
often shows patchy
infiltrates with areas of hyperinflation.
ABGs may show hypoxemia and, if fatigue
sets in,
rising carbon dioxide.
So what's your role as the RT?
First, support oxygenation.
Start with supplemental oxygen, but be
ready to escalate quickly.
Second, optimize ventilation.
These patients may require CPAP or
mechanical ventilation, but you
must be careful.
Because of air trapping, you want to allow
adequate expiratory
time to avoid worsening hyperinflation.
Third, monitor closely for persistent
pulmonary hypertension of the newborn,
or PPHN.
If oxygenation isn't improving as
expected, think shunting.
These patients may need advanced therapies
like inhaled nitric oxide.
And finally, recognize deterioration
early.
Worsening oxygenation, rising carbon
dioxide, or
increasing work of breathing are all red
flags that require escalation.
For board exams, remember this.
MAS is not just obstruction.
It's obstruction plus inflammation plus
pulmonary hypertension.
And your management decisions must address
all three.
As you go through this lesson, focus on
connecting the
pathophysiology to your clinical
decisions.
That's what will make you a strong,
confident respiratory therapist.